Your AI agent knows the answer and
sometimes it recommends the opposite
thing. That was what I took away from a
landmark study from the Mount Sinai
Health System in New York City. They
were studying chat GPT health which is a
new tool that chat GPT rolled out a few
months ago. It was touted as a more
responsible alternative to asking your
health questions to chat GPT. And the
idea was ChatGpt Health would provide
responsible medical advice where it
mattered. That's what the physicians
tested over at Mount Si and what they
found is quite concerning. At a high
level, the system will recommend doctor
visits when you have conditions that
don't require it and the system will
underrecommend ER visits when you have
urgent conditions that should be seen by
an ER. Now, this doesn't happen every
single time. There are many cases in the
middle where the system gets it right.
And I think the patterns that show up
and the way chat GPT health is failing
and this is a very carefully documented
report. I'll go ahead and link it
underneath this video. Those patterns
are things we can all learn from. So
instead of making this a session where
we talk about the defects of chat GPT
health, I want to make it a conversation
about AI agents. And that's why I
started with your agent knows the answer
and sometimes it says the opposite
thing. I think in many cases, especially
if we've seen reasoning traces, we have
seen this happen. I have seen cases
where I'm like, "What is this agent
talking about when I look at the
reasoning trace inside the chat window?"
And then it comes out with something I'm
like, "Oh, that's reasonable." Or, "Oh,
that is terrible." But either way, it
doesn't match the reasoning trace. We
need to get better at talking about how
we value correct action for agents
because as the health study shows what
we are asking agents to do is getting
more and more and more important. In
this case whether we like it or not
people are making life or death
decisions with chat GPT health. They are
deciding whether they should go to the
ER for respiratory failure. And by the
way I did not cherrypick that example.
That is right in the paper. They talk
about the fact that in their study,
Mount Sinai's study, Chad GPT Health
recommended waiting 24 to 48 hours for
respiratory failure to go to the ER
instead of actually going right away,
which is the correct response. That's
not acceptable. That's not something
that we can tolerate as a society
because the costs are too high. The
costs are literally death in some cases.
So, let's step it back a little bit.
Let's say that we're not looking at life
or death, but we're still looking at
important AI agent decisions. If we look
at the spectrum of AI agent
interactions, what is it about agents
and the way they behave that leads to
these kinds of failures? That was the
question I had. And so I took the paper
apart. I wanted to use the Mount Si
paper and the really important subject
of health as a lens through which we can
understand the broader behavior of AI
agents in the system. So I found four
different failure modes. I'm going to
talk about each of them and then I'm
going to talk about a four-layer
architecture that I think addresses
those failure modes. And I will freely
admit at the top we are building this
after the agents are built. In many
ways, we are shutting the barn door
after the horses have gotten out. The
agents are out there. We are building
agents faster than we can email them. It
is now up to us to think about how to
responsibly guard rail them so we do not
have situations like the Chat GPT health
study. Okay, let's get to it. What are
the four failure modes? Why do they
matter? And spoiler alert, none of them
are specific to this medical study.
Anyone who is interested at all in the
agent space, whether you are interested
in open claw, whether you are building
an enterprise agent, you are going to
want to pay attention to this failure
mode one, the inverted U. Chad GPT
health handled textbook emergencies
really, really well. So, classical
stroke, severe anaphilaxis, the cases
every single medical student knows. It
also handled clearly minor conditions
really reasonably. The failures tended
to concentrate at the extreme edges of
the spectrum and that's a pattern we see
other places. So for example, the
emergency might not look like a textbook
case and the system might misdiagnose it
or the non-urgent presentation might
mimic something worse and be
overdiagnosed. This is very
characteristic of the performance shape
of LLMs in production. This is not
limited to the health study. They're
trained on distributions where the
middle is densely represented and the
extremes are very sparse. They perform
best exactly where performance matters
the least in routine cases that any
rules engine could handle. And they
perform the worst on the edges of the
distribution, often where the stakes are
highest. Your agents accuracy dashboard
might say 87% and then everybody would
celebrate. But the inverted U means that
aggregate numbers are often masking
silent failures on the tails of the
distributions, which is precisely where
many consequential decisions live.
What's the so what here? No eval suite
designed to measure average accuracy is
going to turn up this kind of pattern
because by definition, averages will
look good. Your accounts payable agent
will process routine invoices perfectly,
but miss the duplicate that's been
slightly modified. Your claims agent
will handle fender benders fine, but
can't detect the third claim from the
same address in 14 months. So, the agent
is most confident and most wrong on
extreme cases that look structurally
similar to something that the routine
already typically shows. It's easily
fooled. We should all care about that.
Failure mode two. The agent knows but
does not act. The systems own
explanations often identify dangerous
clinical findings correctly in Mount
Sinai's study and then the
recommendation contradicted those
findings. So the reasoning chain said
early respiratory failure. The output
said wait this isn't a rare glitch. It
might be life or death in the chat GPT
health situation but it's not rare from
an agent behavior perspective. Research
on chain of thought faithfulness reveals
that it's a structural property of how
LLMs generate outputs. The reasoning
trace and the final answer frequently
operate as semi-independent processes.
People don't often know that. Studies
show that when researchers insert
incorrect reasoning chains, models can
still produce correct answers a fraction
of the time, confirming the link between
stated reasoning and output is a lot
weaker than it might first appear. This
gets back to how we model agents. If we
model agents as if they're people, we
think that, hey, it's a person, so it
should reason out loud and come to a
logical conclusion based on the
reasoning. That's not how LLMs work. The
reasoning chain is often separate from
the output. Meanwhile, separate research
found models failed to update their
answers in response to logically
significant changes in their reasoning
more than 50% of the time. In other
words, the reasoning chain can be
anchored to the beginning. So the output
of the model may reflect an earlier
state in the reasoning chain than where
the model got to at the end of the
reasoning chain. Oxford's AI governance
initiative has argued that chain of
thought is fundamentally unreliable as
an explanation of a model's decision
process. And I think that as much as we
use it because it's something that's
there, that is a broadly correct
statement. It is not a reliable gauge.
If chain of thought faithfulness can't
be fixed at the model level, the
solution must be architectural. That is
why so much work for agent workflows has
gone into infrastructure recently. And
this matters because if your compliance
screening agent is correctly identifying
an enhanced due diligence jurisdiction
in its reasoning trace and then the
outputs look entirely different and say
this is just a standard risk case,
you're not going to recognize that. It
matters because your customer service
agent might identify a known billing
error pattern in its analysis that would
warrant a customer escalation, but then
recommend a generic 5 to seven business
day review with a automated solution.
So, if you're not reading the chain of
thought and regularly comparing it to
the actual ground truth action and
trying to figure out if they're the same
or different, you are probably missing
some really scary defects in your agent
output that you should pay attention to.
Failure mode three. Social context
hijacks judgment. When a family member
minimized the symptoms of the patient,
triage recommendations shifted
dramatically. The system was actually 12
times more likely to recommend less
urgent care if someone was reported as
having said the patient looks fine. And
so in that situation, we would describe
the agents behavior as an anchoring
bias. And this generalizes really
quickly to all of us. Any agent that
processes inputs that combine structured
data with unstructured human language is
very vulnerable to this. The structured
data should drive the decision. The
unstructured language creates a framing
effect that often anchors the response
and the bias can be really hard to
detect because it's quite subtle. The
agent does not make an obviously wrong
call unless you're looking through the
trace and you're looking through the
output. It just makes a slightly shifted
call that's individually defensible but
systematically biased. And this
underlines again why you have to think
about the overall pattern of responses
and not just individual responses. The
so what here is really clear. A vendor
selection recommendation comes through
with a note from a senior VP that says,
"I'm confident this is the right
choice." The agents analysis ideally
would be identical whether that vice
president note was attached or not, but
in reality it's often not. In lending, a
letter from an employer describing the
applicant as a valued longtime employee
might shift the risk assessment of an AI
agent in banking, not because it
contains material financial information,
but because the positive framing biases
the output. Critically, without the
study design that Mount Sinai used,
where they're using the same scenario
with and without that anchoring input,
that bias would be invisible on many,
many, many standard evaluations. You
would never ever see it. Failure mode
number four, guard rails that fire on
vibes, not on risk. So, in this case,
the Mount Sinai team found that the Chat
GPT health crisis intervention system
activated very unpredictably. It would
fire much more reliably when patients
described vague emotional distress than
when they articulated a concrete threat
of self harm. Mount Sinai's chief AI
officer described it very bluntly. The
alerts were inverted relative to
clinical risk for self harm. In this
case, the guardrails were matching it
looks like on surface level language
patterns, keywords, emotional tone
rather than on the actual risk taxonomy
that clinicians use. This is the
distinction between testing for the
appearance of safety versus testing for
safety. And yes, this is absolutely a
failure case that I've seen appear in
other agents as well. I see guard rails
that fire on the appearance of safety
all the time. A great example is a
security agent that might be monitoring
email or employee behavior to ensure
that company confidential information
doesn't leave the system. The agent
might flag an email labeled confidential
financial data as a problem, even if it
was just a press release discussing
public quarterly results sent to a safe
list. Meanwhile, if an employee exported
50,000 individual customer records, but
none of them contained finances to a
personal Dropbox, that might be
considered okay by the agent because the
employee described it as a backup of
project files. It had the appearance of
safety. This is one of the trickiest
evals to diagnose in practice because
what it really amounts to is that the
system is going to tell you that it is
doing well is going to have grounds for
that assessment and you have to know
enough to say actually I know you think
you recommended the right credit card
for that customer in that situation but
it's wrong and here's why. So you need
guard rails that actually assess for the
real value you're looking for, not for
the appearance of value. What's really
interesting about the Sinai study is
that the methodologies the doctors built
to evaluate chat GPT health end up being
something that is scalable, end up being
something we can use in non-health
scenarios. The key technique they used
is a concept called factorial design
where they used the same scenario across
16 contextual variations. This
controlled variation exposed anchoring
bias, guardrail inversion and the
inverted U extremes. There was no
standard benchmark here. Testing every
scenario once under a single set of
conditions would not have surfaced the
kind of findings that Mount Sinai
ultimately discovered about Chat GBT
health. So for us building agent
systems, the key insight is this and
it's good news. Variation types are
domain general. By which I mean
variation types scale. You can have many
types of variation but they scale across
an infinite number of domains. So you
can have an extreme risk variation type.
You can have a human out of the loop
variation type. You can have a tool call
fail variation type that scales across
any number of scenarios. What changes
what's domainspecific is the scenario
itself. And so you would have only one
specific scenario for the tool call
failure in finance versus one specific
failure for the tool call failure in
health. One specific example for social
pressure and anchoring bias. This
structure basically having types that
function as sections of our eval library
that are stable and then having specific
scenarios that are more like books. This
scales, this allows you to build a
deliberate context library that you can
evaluate against. It's a reusable set of
variation templates specialized per
domain following similar structural
patterns. So you can take any scenario
at all and you can add a stakeholder who
minimizes severity. You can add a
contradictory piece of context. You can
add a social pressure cue. You can add a
time pressure element, a hedging
qualifier. And that's a mechanical
transformation that you can stick into
any scenario library to enrich your
eval. And unlike the medical case,
enterprise scenarios can be generated
semi-automatically from historical data.
And so you already have processed
claims, approved procurements,
compliance screening, a bunch of data
from chats with customers that you can
use to start to build this out. Now,
nobody's productized this and made it
easy, and I suppose that's an
opportunity, but it's certainly
something that you can do on your own as
well. And if you're curious about how to
do that, I have a guide that I put
together over on the Substack that will
help you get started. So, let's assume
we have a little context library. We've
understood what some of these failure
modes and patterns look like. What does
an architecture look like for
evaluations that help us be sure that
these agents are actually working well
in production? Layer number one, assume
that you are routing for progressive
autonomy, not complete autonomy when you
route your agents. So you want to be in
a position where if it's a high
confident, low stakes decision, you just
trust the agent to make it. You also
want to have an option to put a human in
the loop for extreme edge cases. There
are lots of examples of how you can do
this. One of the most popular ones is to
run the agent on the edge case, but run
it in shadow mode following the human
until you are sure that in x percentage
of cases, even on the edge, the agent is
going to make the right call. And so you
have the agent shadow the human. The
human does the work. The human assesses
this edge case invoice and then the
agent learns over time as you start to
understand the actual components the
human is using to resolve the edge case
correctly. This is what progressive
autonomy looks like. It is hard work,
but if you're doing high stakes work,
there's no substitute for making sure
that you give that autonomy as the agent
effectively becomes more capable through
adding more and more and more reliable
evals that reflect the actual underlying
distribution of reality. Layer two in
your architecture, let's assume you've
got progressive autonomy. Layer two is
deterministic validation. So, this is
one of those cases where I know we love
our LLMs, but we need to be in a place
where we can use rules-based checks that
verify where it's obvious that we should
use those. We don't need to always use
the LLM just to use the LLM. And so, a
great example is like a standard if then
in a compliance case, right? If the
reasoning contains any enhanced due
diligence flag and the classification is
standard risk, please escalate. All
you're doing is you're using a
rules-based engine to look at the
reasoning trace and to look at the
output and to say, "Wow, if these don't
match, we should probably have a chat."
Don't ask the model to catch its own
inconsistencies and call that
evaluation. Instead, think about how you
can get an external perspective that
reliably assesses whether what the model
says it's thinking about is reflected in
the model's actions. Layer three is
really about building a flywheel. And I
want to be very precise here. When you
are judging agents in production, you
have to pick which side of the risk
pyramid you want to be on. Let's say
you're building, it's a knife, it's a
pyramid, it's a narrow shape, right? You
want to be in a world where you have
either false negatives or false
positives. In general, for most
highstakes systems, you would rather
have false positives because it means
that you're capturing more of the true
positives. You don't want to be in a
world where you have false negatives
because for high stakes decisions that
means you're missing things that you
really ought to not miss. And so when
you set up an eval system bias toward
having false positives and then do two
things. One, when there's a positive,
review it. Dig into whether it's a true
or a false positive. In other words, is
it a real problem the agent ran into or
is it a false problem that was flagged
incorrectly by the LLM as judge? And
then regardless, think about whether you
need to update your eval set, the thing
the LLM is judging the agent run against
the rule book to see if that rulebook
can be made smarter and you can more
accurately represent what is truly good
versus what is truly bad. But then
you're not done because the other thing
almost nobody does is you go back and
look out of an abundance of caution at
the runs of the agent that the LLM as
judge passed and said, "Yep, this is
good. This is good. This is good." Even
if you bias toward false positives, you
should still do this. And when you do
this and you catch a situation where
there was a defect, where something
looked good, where the agent said, "I
know what I'm doing, and here's the
result." and the LLM as judge looked at
the rule book and said, "Yeah, all
right. This is fine and it was wrong."
Figure out how you can make that into an
evalu.
That kind of continuous flywheel is
something that very few people are
doing, but it's characteristic of high
performance systems. Level four is
factorial stress testing. This is what
Mount Sinai did where they had a set of
cases they wanted chat JPT health to
diagnose but they deliberately in a
controlled way added stressors in those
prompts. So here's a social cue saying
my friend said I'm fine. That's a
stressor. And they measured to see if
the output shifted when the unstructured
context changed. In that situation, what
you're doing is you're measuring the
factors that drive agent behavior. This
is very much the gold standard. It's not
a cheap test to run. It's not something
you can do on every agent all the time.
But if you have a high stakes agent and
you don't know if it's social anchoring,
you don't know if it is under
recommending an action that you need to
get right, you should consider factorial
stress testing. Now, you might think,
wow, this is a ton of work. The study
that Mount Sinai described was dozens of
people. We certainly can't afford that
for our agent. What are we doing? The
answer here is to think in systems. Most
of the effort to build a good eval
system should be front-loaded not
ongoing. So when I talked about building
a library where you have this library of
scenario types and then individual
scenarios that is a eval library that
you can build once and not have to build
all the time and semi-automatically
populate when you set up your eval
schema so that LLM as judge can operate
on every interaction that is a one-time
investment. And then when you start to
get into creating specific scenarios,
that is a specific one-time investment
for experts in the space. And then when
you start to get into continuous
operation, all you're doing is
minimizing human involvement over time
because you are catching more and more
and more of those test cases. And as I
described, you're updating that flywheel
so you more accurately assess what goes
wrong and what doesn't. If this all
sounds like a lot of work, I'm not going
to lie, it's a lot of work. But this is
what it takes to successfully run an
agent on a production workload. And
yeah, maybe your openclaw agent, you
don't care if it deletes all of your
emails and you're fine with the risk and
you're not going to do evals. If you're
in an enterprise situation or even a
small business situation, your risks are
much higher. You can't just make that
distinction. You have to take the time
to make sure the agent does the work.
The question for all of us is not
whether our agents have blind spots.
They absolutely do. It's whether we have
built infrastructure to find those blind
spots before our customers run into them
and potentially have very very serious
negative repercussions as a result. I
describe chat GPT health because I think
it is literally the most life ordeath
example of how this can go wrong. But I
think that the implications of this are
much wider. This is something that all
of us should be thinking about. In fact,
all of us must be thinking about. In
fact, I will go farther. We are now in a
world with AI insurance for agents. You
will not be insured or be able to obtain
an insurance policy as an AI agent
builder, which will soon be required.
It's going to be a couple of years, but
I I can see it coming. Unless you do
this, unless you think about your evals,
this is not going to be optional. We all
have to think about this stuff. So, if
you're in the agent building space, the
agent consuming space, if you're in the
agent design space, understand the
hidden factors that make your agents
misbehave because if you don't, we're
all going to regret it. And best of luck
to the folks working on fixing chat GPT
health. That is not an easy job. It is a
brutally hard job. And I know they did
their best to design it in the first
place. And so having to go back and look
at it again, it's going to be tough.